In this lecture, you'll learn about our second option for inter-VLAN routing, which is Router on
a Stick, and out of the three options,
this is probably the one that you're most likely to get tested on on the CCNA exam.
So, make sure you understand this and know how you do the configuration for it.
Okay, so this is how it's going to work.
We've got our switch here in the middle, and we've got our access ports configured on here for our Engineering
VLAN PCs and our Sales PCs.
In the previous option, we were using a separate physical interface
on the router for each of our different VLANs,
but a problem with that is you're going to run out of interfaces.
So a way that we can resolve that is by using virtual sub-interfaces on the router, which are all on the same
underlying physical interface.
So, that's what we're doing here.
So going down from the router to the switch was actually just one physical interface here and one physical
cable.
The physical interface we're using on the roouter is interface fastEthernet0/1 here. So we configure
that interface with no IP address, but we do a 'no shutdown' on it to bring the interface up.
Then, we add the interface fastEthernet0/1.10. Just by putting in the command 'interface fastEthernet0/1.10',
that will create the virtual sub-interface for us.
We then specify that that sub-interface is going to be in VLAN 10 and we give it the IP address 10.10.10.1.
That is going to act as the default gateway address for our Engineering PCs.
We then also create a sub-interface for the Sales VLAN.
We're going to use interface fastEthernet0/1.20
for this example. With your sub-interfaces, it's the main physical interface name, and then a dot, and
then the sub-interface
number, and you don't have to number them sequentially, like .1, .2, .3, and so on.
So that's why I've used .10 and .20 here, because it's more logical.
It ties up with the actual VLAN number.
So on interface fastEthernet0/1.20,
I specify that that is for VLAN 20 and give it IP address
10.10.20.1.
Now, what's going to happen is my Engineering PCs,
when they want to send traffic to another IP subnet, I've already configured them with their default
gateway address of 10.10.10.1.
So if an Engineering PC wants to send traffic to a different subnet, it will send out an ARP request for
the MAC address of its default gateway.
The switch will forward to everything that is in the Engineering VLAN, all the other Engineering PCs, and it will also
get sent up the fastEthernet0/1 interface going towards the router, and we've configured that interface on
the switch as a trunk port.
So when the switch sends it up to the router, it will tag it with VLAN 10. So, it will hit the VLAN 10
sub-interface. The router can then reply back to the ARP request and we're going to have a routing going through
there.
So whenever the switch sends traffic up to the router, because that fastEthernet0/1 port
is configured as a trunk,
it will tag it with the Dot1Q tag. When it reaches the router, it looks at the Dot1Q tag and that's how it knows
which sub-interface this traffic is for.
So the configuration to do this, on the router, 'interface FastEthernet0/1'.
So I'm using a different interface
number here, FastEthernet0/1, for this configuration.
That is the physical interface that is connected to this switch. I don't need an IP address on here,
so I say 'no ip address'.
I do need to bring it up,
so I say 'no shutdown'.
I then create my first sub-interface with the command 'interface fastEthernet0/1.10'. Because
it starts with fastEthernet0/1,
it knows it's a sub-interface attached to this physical interface,
and then .10 is the sub-interface number.
'encapsulation dot1q 10', by saying that, whenever any traffic comes up and hits the interface
which has got a Dot1Q tag on there, if it's a Dot1Q tag 10,
the router knows it is for this sub-interface.
Whenever I send traffic in the other direction, sending it down to the switch,
when it comes from this sub-interface, I will tag it again with Dot1Q tag 10.
I put my IP address on here,
IP address 10.10.10.1 with a /24 mask. So, that is my Engineering VLAN sub-interface configured.
I do exactly the same config for my Sales VLAN sub-interface.
So 'interface FastEthernet0/1.20', 'encapsulation dot1q 20' for the Sales VLAN,
'ip address 10.10.20.1 21 255.255.255.0'.
If I just go back a slide,
you see we've got the connection to the Wide Area Network (WAN) again available
out interface FastEthernet0/2 with IP address 203.0.113.1.
The next hop address in our example is 203.0.113.2.
I want my PCs on the inside to be able to get outside the Local Area Network (LAN) as well,
so that's why I'm configuring a static default route here.
So the command is 'ip route 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0',
the next hop address of 203.0.113.2.
Okay, that's the entire router configuration. I need to put a matching configuration on the other side of the
link on the switch.
So on the switch, I say 'interface FastEthernet0/1', 'switchport mode trunk'. So now,
whenever this switch sends any traffic up to the router, it will tag it with the Dot1Q tag,
so then it will hit the correct sub-interface on the router.
Some considerations here, you don't need a separate physical interface for every VLAN. So this
is better than option 1 where we did that,
you're less likely to run out of interfaces here.
However, traffic being routed within the campus still has to go up and down a physical Ethernet cable
to the router.
In here, you've got traffic for multiple VLANs all using the same cable,
so there's more contention for bandwidth than when we were using separate interfaces in option 1.
Okay, so that's the theory. Next up, let's configure this in the lab. We've got the same topology as in the
last lecture when we did option 1.
The only differenc is we've only got one link going between the switch and the router here.
Again, I've already configured all of the Layer 2 configuration.
So I've configured my trunking going through from SW1 to SW3,
and I've configured my access ports and put the correct PC into the correct VLAN.
So if I go onto my ENG1 PC, you can see it can ping other Eng PCs,
so I can ping 10.10.10.11, the other PC on the same switch, and ping 10.10.10.12
over on SW3.
But if I tried to ping a Sales PC, this isn't going to work because I haven't configured the routing
yet.
So, let's do that now.
I'll configure the router first.
So again, I need to open this on Packet Tracer.
I'll open up R1,
go to the command line,
and go to global configuration. So the switch is attached to interface fastEthernet0/0 here,
'no ip address' is the default anyway, and I need to do a 'no shutdown' to bring the physical interface up.
Then I'll create my first sub-interface, so 'interface fastEthernet0/0.10', and then I will say
'encapsulation dot1q 10'.
The IP address 10.10.10.1, with a /24 subnet mask.
I don't need to do a 'no shut' here because it's a virtual interface.
As long as the underlying physical interface is up, this will be up too. I need to configure my sub-interface
for the Sales VLAN as well.
So that's also an interface fastEthernet0/0 and it's going to be .20.
I'll say 'encapsulation dot1q 20' and 'ip address 10.10.20.1 255.255.255.0'.
I'm also going to do my default static
route to allow them to route out to the WAN as well.
So 'ip route
0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0',
the next hop was 203.0.113.2.
Okay, that is my router config done.
Next up, I need to configure a matching configuration on the other side of the link,
so that was on SW2. On SW2, at global config,
the router is connected to interface fastEthernet0/1 here and I need to say 'switchport trunk encapsulation dot1q',
and 'switchport mode trunk'.
Okay, that's all the configuration done. All I need to do now is test it.
So I'll go back on to ENG1 and let's try pinging the Sales PC that's on the same switch
here.
So that was 10.10.20.12
and it will probably miss a few pings
while the interfaces and everything's coming up and it's doing the ARP,
so let's just wait for this.
In real-world, it's probably going to be successful a bit quicker, this is because I'm using Packet
Tracer here. So looks like maybe all the pings are going to fail,
let's try it again,
and there we go.
The ping is working now.
Let's try pinging 10.10.20.10 over on the switch on the other side of the network,
and this should hopefully work fine too.
Yeah, there we go.
That's all good.
So that was the theory and configuration and verification for Router on a Stick.
See you in the next lecture, for the last option which is using a Layer 3 switch.